Now that we're armed
with knowledge of
Python's expressions,
comparators, and variables,
we can dive right into
how to use them in
our scripts to perform
different actions
based on their values.
The ability of a program to alter
its execution sequence
is called branching,
and it's a key component in
making your scripts useful.
You probably use the idea of
branching a bunch in
your everyday life.
For example, if it's before noon,
you might greet someone
by saying good morning
instead of good afternoon
or good evening.
If it's raining outside, you
might choose to take an umbrella.
If it's cold, you
probably wear a jacket.
In your scripts, you can instruct
your computer to make
decisions based on inputs to.
Let's take a look at
an IT-focused example.
In many companies, new
employees can choose
the username they'll use to
access the company's systems,
and usually, the chosen username
needs to fit with a
given set of guidelines.
Companies can set
different criteria
for what a valid
username looks like.
For now, let's assume
that at your company,
a valid username has to have
at least three characters.
You've been tasked with writing
a program that will tell
the user if their
choices valid or not.
To do that, you could write
a function like this.
This function checks
whether the length
of the username is
smaller than three.
If it is, the function prints
a message saying that
the username is invalid.
Look closely at how the
if statement is written.
We write the keyword if
followed by the condition
that we want to check for,
and then followed by a colon.
After that, comes the
body of the if block,
which is indented
further to the right.
You may notice that there are
some similarities between
how an if block and the
function are defined.
The keyword, either def or if,
indicates the start
of a special block.
At the end of the first
line, we use a colon,
and then the body
of the function or
the if block is
indented to the right.
But there's also an
important difference
between how an if block and
a function are defined.
The body of the if block
will only execute when
the condition evaluates to
true; otherwise, it skipped.
Of course, you can do a
lot more things inside
the body of the if block
than just printing stuff.
As we expand our
programming abilities,
we'll learn how to do things like
shorten texts that's too long,
delete a file if it exists,
start a service if it's not
running, and a bunch more.
If your code is
inside a function,
you could also choose
to return a value
depending on whether a
certain condition is met.
Can you imagine how
that would look?
By now, you know how
to define functions,
and inside those functions,
you can now make your program do
something only when certain
conditions are met.
Ready to branch out and make
our branches even more
interesting with else statements?
Then hop on over
to the next video,
or else, you'll miss out.